---
title: 'Questions and Answers'
date: 2023-08-23
permalink: /blog/qna/
tags:
  - Learning
---
<br>

This is a collection of questions and answers. The questions are from Internet, interviews, or my own thoughts. The answers are mostly from my own perspective and understanding. It is inspired by my supervisor Dinh, who has a excellent capability of asking questions and answering them. I think self-reflection is the key to unlock this capability that leads me to this collection.

<!-- Some questions are really personal which I am really embarrassed to share. -->

## Questions

### Why do you want to do research?

### What do you want to do next? after PhD?

### If you have to organize a reading group about a new topic (e.g., Multimodal learning) what will you do? (asked in an interview)

### What is your most catastrophic/costly failure and what did you learn from it? (asked in an interview)

### Tell me about a time when you had a confliction with your supervisor on a project and how did you resolve it? (asked in an interview)

### How to engage with clients, supervisors, and colleagues?

### Tell me about a time when you had an obstacle in your research and how did you overcome it?

### Why do you want to do research in our group? Why do you want to do this project?

### Are you a researcher or an engineer?


### What is the difference between a good researcher and a great researcher? (Suggested by Github Copilot)

A good researcher is someone who can do research well. A great researcher is someone who can do research well and can also inspire others to do research well. (Answered by Github Copilot)

A good researcher is someone who can push the field forward a little bit. A great researcher is someone who can hold the whole field back for several years. (a half-joke answer by Prof. Truyen Tran as I remember).

A great researcher is someone who has his own research agenda and can inspire others to follow his agenda. He will not be affected by the trend, but just focus on his own idea and (slowly) prove that his idea is right (or wrong).
