---
layout: post
title: Food for thought
description: Not something deep
tags: f4t
giscus_comments: true
date: 2023-08-01
featured: true

# authors:
#   - name: Tuan-Anh Bui
#     url: "https://tuananhbui89.github.io/"
#     affiliations:
#       name: Monash University

# bibliography: 2023-06-02-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
# toc:
#   - name: from Charlie Munger
#   - name: from Naval Ravikant
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
# _styles: >
#   .fake-img {
#     background: #bbb;
#     border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
#     box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
#     margin-bottom: 12px;
#   }
#   .fake-img p {
#     font-family: monospace;
#     color: white;
#     text-align: left;
#     margin: 12px 0;
#     text-align: center;
#     font-size: 16px;
#   }

toc:
  beginning: true
---

## 10 best ideas/concepts from Charlie Munger

(Sorry, this is not my original content, but I forgot where I got it from.)

**“Knowing what you don’t know is more useful than being brilliant.”**

Most people spend their lives wrestling with the consequences of poor decisions. But the truth is it’s much easier to avoid stupidity than try to be smart.

Admit you know nothing. Remove ego from the equation.

**“A majority of life’s errors are caused by forgetting what one is really trying to do.”**

We set goals, pursue them, then get distracted.

To achieve something meaningful, you need to constantly correct course.

Set a north star and keep it front of mind.

**“Mimicking the herd invites regression to the mean.”**

If you do the same as everyone else, you’ll get the same results. 

But most people are:
• Unhappy
• Unfulfilled
• Unmotivated

Following society’s standards traps you in them.

Be bold. Go against the grain.

**“To get what you want, you have to deserve what you want.”**

Naval once said the world is an efficient place. 

You can’t control results, but you can control your: 
· Character
· Work ethic
· Willingness to learn 

Earn what you want.

**“The fundamental algorithm of life – repeat what works.”**

It’s easy to overcomplicate success.

But the truth is everything you do creates feedback. Smart people listen. 

When something goes poorly, do less.

When something goes well, do it much more.

**“Those who keep learning, will keep rising.”**

Most people stop learning at 18. Munger is still going at 98.

Knowledge is an asset that compounds over time. 

The more you know, the better you think. Better choices, great consequences. 

Schedule time to study.

**“You don’t have to be brilliant, only a little bit wiser than the other guys, on average, for a long time.”**

Berkshire Hathaway is valued at \$991.89 billion.

Buffet and Munger’s approach?

Rationality and patience.

It isn’t a sexy approach, but the results sure as hell are.

**“The best thing a human being can do is help another human being know more.”**

The best way to live your life is in service to other people. Especially now with the online opportunities. 

Be generous with your ideas. Share what you know and help others win.

**“We insist on a lot of time being available almost every day to just sit and think.”**

We live at a time of constant input. Everyone wants to maximise every moment for productivity.

But life is cause and effect.

Decisions are the key to success. Time to think is the priority.

**“You must know the big ideas in the big disciplines and use them routinely.”**

Principles from:
· Maths
· Physics
· Biology
· Philosophy 
· Engineering

All have a profound impact on life.

Study mental models. Build a toolkit. Treat your mind like your greatest asset.

## [How to get rich (without getting lucky) by Naval Ravikant](https://mcdonnellcallum.medium.com/naval-ravikant-how-to-get-rich-without-getting-lucky-e8d32bba14d1)

Some I like with my current knowledge and experience:

- You will get rich by giving society what it wants but does not yet know how to get. At scale.
- Play iterated games. All the returns in life, whether in wealth, relationships, or knowledge, come from compound interest.
- Arm yourself with specific knowledge, accountability, and leverage.
- About specific knowledge:
  - Specific knowledge is knowledge that you cannot be trained for. If society can train you, it can train someone else, and replace you.
  - When specific knowledge is taught, it’s through apprenticeships, not schools.
  - Specific knowledge is often highly technical or creative. It cannot be outsourced or automated.
- Work as hard as you can. Even though who you work with and what you work on are more important than how hard you work.